　　About Marx:

　　Karl Heinrich Marx (May 5, 1818   March 14, 1883) was a Prussianphilosopher, political economist, and revolutionary. Marx addressed awide range of issues; he is most famous for his analysis of history,summed up in the opening line of the introduction to the CommunistManifesto (1848): "The history of all hitherto existing society is the his-tory of class struggles." Marx believed that capitalism would be replacedby socialism which in turn would bring upon communism. Source:Wikipedia

　　About Engels:

　　Friedrich Engels (November 28, 1820, Barmen, Prussia   August 5,1895, London, England) a 19th-century German social scientist andphilosopher, developed communist theory alongside his better-knowncollaborator, Karl Marx, co-authoring The Communist Manifesto (1848).Engels also edited the second and third volumes of Das Kapital afterMarx's death. Source: Wikipedia

　　Introduction

　　A spectre is haunting Europe   the spectre of communism. All thepowers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise thisspectre: Pope and Tsar, Metternich and Guizot, French Radicals andGerman police-spies.

　　Where is the party in opposition that has not been decried as commun-istic by its opponents in power? Where is the opposition that has nothurled back the branding reproach of communism, against the more ad-vanced opposition parties, as well as against its reactionary adversaries?

　　Two things result from this fact:

　　Communism is already acknowledged by all European powers to be it-self a power.

　　It is high time that Communists should openly, in the face of thewhole world, publish their views, their aims, their tendencies, and meetthis nursery tale of the spectre of communism with a manifesto of theparty itself.

　　To this end, Communists of various nationalities have assembled inLondon and sketched the following manifesto, to be published in theEnglish, French, German, Italian, Flemish and Danish languages.

　　Chapter 1

　　Bourgeois and Proletarians

　　The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.

　　Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-masterand journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constantopposition to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden,now open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary re-constitution of society at large, or in the common ruin of the contendingclasses.

　　In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost everywhere a complic-ated arrangement of society into various orders, a manifold gradation ofsocial rank. In ancient Rome we have patricians, knights, plebeians,slaves; in the Middle Ages, feudal lords, vassals, guild-masters, journey-men, apprentices, serfs; in almost all of these classes, again, subordinategradations.

　　The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins offeudal society has not done away with class antagonisms. It has but es-tablished new classes, new conditions of oppression, new forms ofstruggle in place of the old ones.

　　Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this dis-tinct feature: it has simplified class antagonisms. Society as a whole ismore and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two greatclasses directly facing each other   bourgeoisie and proletariat.

　　From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers ofthe earliest towns. From these burgesses the first elements of the bour-geoisie were developed.

　　The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up freshground for the rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chinese markets,the colonization of America, trade with the colonies, the increase in themeans of exchange and in commodities generally, gave to commerce, tonavigation, to industry, an impulse never before known, and thereby, to

　　the revolutionary element in the tottering feudal society, a rapiddevelopment.

　　The feudal system of industry, in which industrial production wasmonopolized by closed guilds, now no longer suffices for the growingwants of the new markets. The manufacturing system took its place. Theguild-masters were pushed aside by the manufacturing middle class; di-vision of labor between the different corporate guilds vanished in theface of division of labor in each single workshop.

　　Meantime, the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever rising.Even manufacturers no longer sufficed. Thereupon, steam and ma-chinery revolutionized industrial production. The place of manufacturewas taken by the giant, Modern Industry; the place of the industrialmiddle class by industrial millionaires, the leaders of the whole industri-al armies, the modern bourgeois.

　　Modern industry has established the world market, for which the dis-covery of America paved the way. This market has given an immensedevelopment to commerce, to navigation, to communication by land.This development has, in turn, reacted on the extension of industry; andin proportion as industry, commerce, navigation, railways extended, inthe same proportion the bourgeoisie developed, increased its capital, andpushed into the background every class handed down from the MiddleAges.

　　We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the product ofa long course of development, of a series of revolutions in the modes ofproduction and of exchange.

　　Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied bya corresponding political advance in that class. An oppressed class underthe sway of the feudal nobility, an armed and self-governing associationof medieval commune: here independent urban republic (as in Italy andGermany); there taxable "third estate" of the monarchy (as in France); af-terward, in the period of manufacturing proper, serving either the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy as a counterpoise against the nobility,and, in fact, cornerstone of the great monarchies in general   the bour-geoisie has at last, since the establishment of Modern Industry and of theworld market, conquered for itself, in the modern representative state,exclusive political sway. The executive of the modern state is but a com-mittee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a most revolutionary part.

　　The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an end toall feudal, patriarchal, idyllic relations. It has pitilessly torn asunder themotley feudal ties that bound man to his "natural superiors", and has leftno other nexus between man and man than naked self-interest, than cal-lous "cash payment". It has drowned out the most heavenly ecstasies ofreligious fervour, of chivalrous enthusiasm, of philistine sentimentalism,in the icy water of egotistical calculation. It has resolved personal worthinto exchange value, and in place of the numberless indefeasiblechartered freedoms, has set up that single, unconscionable freedom  Free Trade. In one word, for exploitation, veiled by religious and politic-al illusions, it has substituted naked, shameless, direct, brutalexploitation.

　　The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation hithertohonored and looked up to with reverent awe. It has converted the physi-cian, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into its paidwage laborers.

　　The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil,and has reduced the family relation into a mere money relation.

　　The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that the brutal dis-play of vigour in the Middle Ages, which reactionaries so much admire,found its fitting complement in the most slothful indolence. It has beenthe first to show what man's activity can bring about. It has accom-plished wonders far surpassing Egyptian pyramids, Roman aqueducts,and Gothic cathedrals; it has conducted expeditions that put in the shadeall former exoduses of nations and crusades.

　　The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionizing the in-struments of production, and thereby the relations of production, andwith them the whole relations of society. Conservation of the old modesof production in unaltered form, was, on the contrary, the first conditionof existence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant revolutionizing ofproduction, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlast-ing uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from allearlier ones. All fixed, fast frozen relations, with their train of ancientand venerable prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formedones become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts intoair, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face withsober senses his real condition of life and his relations with his kind.

　　The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases thebourgeoisie over the entire surface of the globe. It must nestle every-where, settle everywhere, establish connections everywhere.

　　The bourgeoisie has, through its exploitation of the world market, giv-en a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in everycountry. To the great chagrin of reactionaries, it has drawn from underthe feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-estab-lished national industries have been destroyed or are daily being des-troyed. They are dislodged by new industries, whose introduction be-comes a life and death question for all civilized nations, by industriesthat no longer work up indigenous raw material, but raw materialdrawn from the remotest zones; industries whose products are con-sumed, not only at home, but in every quarter of the globe. In place ofthe old wants, satisfied by the production of the country, we find newwants, requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant lands andclimes. In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-suffi-ciency, we have intercourse in every direction, universal inter-depend-ence of nations. And as in material, so also in intellectual production.The intellectual creations of individual nations become common prop-erty. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more andmore impossible, and from the numerous national and local literatures,there arises a world literature.

　　The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of pro-duction, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, drawsall, even the most barbarian, nations into civilization. The cheap prices ofcommodities are the heavy artillery, with which it batters down allChinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians' intensely obstinatehatred of foreigners to capitulate. It compels all nations, on pain of ex-tinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels them tointroduce what it calls civilization into their midst, i.e., to become bour-geois themselves. In one word, it creates a world after its own image.

　　The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the towns. Ithas created enormous cities, has greatly increased the urban populationas compared with the rural, and has thus rescued a considerable part ofthe population from the idiocy of rural life. Just as it has made the coun-try dependent on the towns, so it has made barbarian and semi-barbari-an countries dependent on the civilized ones, nations of peasants on na-tions of bourgeois, the East on the West.

　　The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the scatteredstate of the population, of the means of production, and of property. Ithas agglomerated population, centralized the means of production, andhas concentrated property in a few hands. The necessary consequence ofthis was political centralization. Independent, or but loosely connectedprovinces, with separate interests, laws, governments, and systems oftaxation, became lumped together into one nation, with one government,one code of laws, one national class interest, one frontier, and one cus-toms tariff.

　　The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has cre-ated more massive and more colossal productive forces than have allpreceding generations together. Subjection of nature's forces to man, ma-chinery, application of chemistry to industry and agriculture, steam nav-igation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of whole continents for cul-tivation, canalization or rivers, whole populations conjured out of theground   what earlier century had even a presentiment that such pro-ductive forces slumbered in the lap of social labor?

　　We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whosefoundation the bourgeoisie built itself up, were generated in feudal soci-ety. At a certain stage in the development of these means of productionand of exchange, the conditions under which feudal society producedand exchanged, the feudal organization of agriculture and manufactur-ing industry, in one word, the feudal relations of property became nolonger compatible with the already developed productive forces; theybecame so many fetters. They had to be burst asunder; they were burstasunder.

　　Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a social andpolitical constitution adapted in it, and the economic and political swayof the bourgeois class.

　　A similar movement is going on before our own eyes. Modern bour-geois society, with its relations of production, of exchange and of prop-erty, a society that has conjured up such gigantic means of productionand of exchange, is like the sorcerer who is no longer able to control thepowers of the nether world whom he has called up by his spells. Formany a decade past, the history of industry and commerce is but the his-tory of the revolt of modern productive forces against modern conditionsof production, against the property relations that are the conditions forthe existence of the bourgeois and of its rule. It is enough to mention thecommercial crises that, by their periodical return, put the existence of the

　　entire bourgeois society on its trial, each time more threateningly. Inthese crises, a great part not only of the existing products, but also of thepreviously created productive forces, are periodically destroyed. In thesecrises, there breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier epochs, wouldhave seemed an absurdity   the epidemic of over-production. Societysuddenly finds itself put back into a state of momentary barbarism; it ap-pears as if a famine, a universal war of devastation, had cut off the sup-ply of every means of subsistence; industry and commerce seem to bedestroyed. And why? Because there is too much civilization, too muchmeans of subsistence, too much industry, too much commerce. The pro-ductive forces at the disposal of society no longer tend to further the de-velopment of the conditions of bourgeois property; on the contrary, theyhave become too powerful for these conditions, by which they arefettered, and so soon as they overcome these fetters, they bring disorderinto the whole of bourgeois society, endanger the existence of bourgeoisproperty. The conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow to comprisethe wealth created by them. And how does the bourgeoisie get overthese crises? On the one hand, by enforced destruction of a mass of pro-ductive forces; on the other, by the conquest of new markets, and by themore thorough exploitation of the old ones. That is to say, by paving theway for more extensive and more destructive crises, and by diminishingthe means whereby crises are prevented.

　　The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to theground are now turned against the bourgeoisie itself.

　　But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring deathto itself; it has also called into existence the men who are to wield thoseweapons   the modern working class   the proletarians.

　　In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i.e., capital, is developed, in the sameproportion is the proletariat, the modern working class, developed   aclass of laborers, who live only so long as they find work, and who findwork only so long as their labor increases capital. These laborers, whomust sell themselves piecemeal, are a commodity, like every other articleof commerce, and are consequently exposed to all the vicissitudes ofcompetition, to all the fluctuations of the market.

　　Owing to the extensive use of machinery, and to the division of labor,the work of the proletarians has lost all individual character, and, con-sequently, all charm for the workman. He becomes an appendage of themachine, and it is only the most simple, most monotonous, and mosteasily acquired knack, that is required of him. Hence, the cost of

　　production of a workman is restricted, almost entirely, to the means ofsubsistence that he requires for maintenance, and for the propagation ofhis race. But the price of a commodity, and therefore also of labor, isequal to its cost of production. In proportion, therefore, as the repulsive-ness of the work increases, the wage decreases. What is more, in propor-tion as the use of machinery and division of labor increases, in the sameproportion the burden of toil also increases, whether by prolongation ofthe working hours, by the increase of the work exacted in a given time,or by increased speed of machinery, etc.

　　Modern Industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchalmaster into the great factory of the industrial capitalist. Masses oflaborers, crowded into the factory, are organized like soldiers. Asprivates of the industrial army, they are placed under the command of aperfect hierarchy of officers and sergeants. Not only are they slaves ofthe bourgeois class, and of the bourgeois state; they are daily and hourlyenslaved by the machine, by the overlooker, and, above all, in the indi-vidual bourgeois manufacturer himself. The more openly this despotismproclaims gain to be its end and aim, the more petty, the more hatefuland the more embittering it is.

　　